    Much of the information we have today about chimpanzees comes from the
groundbreaking, long-term research of the great conservationist, Jane Goodall.

Jane Goodall was born in London, England, on April 3, 1934. On her second
birthday, her father gave her a toy chimpanzee named Jubilee. Jubilee was named
after a baby chimp in the London Zoo, and seemed to foretell the course Jane’s
life would take. To this day, Jubilee sits in a chair in Jane’s London home.
From an early age, Jane was fascinated by animals and animal stories. By the age
of 10, she was talking about going to Africa to live among the animals there. At
the time, in the early 1940s, this was a radical idea because women did not go
to Africa by themselves.

As a young woman, Jane finished school in London, attended secretarial school,
and then worked for a documentary filmmaker for a while. When a school friend
invited her to visit Kenya, she worked as a waitress until she had earned the
fare to travel there by boat. She was 23 years old.

Once in Kenya, she met Dr. Louis Leakey, a famous paleontologist and
anthropologist. He was impressed with her thorough knowledge of Africa and its
wildlife, and hired her to assist him and his wife on a fossil-hunting
expedition to Olduvai Gorge. Dr. Leakey soon realized that Jane was the perfect
person to complete a study he had been planning for some time. She expressed her
interest in the idea of studying animals by living in the wild with them, rather
than studying dead animals through paleontology.

Dr. Leakey and Jane began planning a study of a group of chimpanzees who were
living on the shores of Lake Tanganyika in Kenya. At first, the British
authorities would not approve their plan. At the time, they thought it was too
dangerous for a woman to live in the wilds of Africa alone. But Jane’s mother,
Vanne, agreed to join her so that she would not be alone. Finally, the
authorities gave Jane the clearance she needed in order to go to Africa and
begin her study

In July of 1960, Jane and her mother arrived at Gombe National Park in what was
then called Tanganyika and is now called Tanzania. Jane faced many challenges as
she began her work. The chimpanzees did not accept her right away, and it took
months for them to get used to her presence in their territory. But she was very
patient and remained focused on her goal. Little by little, she was able to
enter their world.

At first, she was able to watch the chimpanzees only from a great distance,
using binoculars. As time passed, she was able to move her observation point
closer to them while still using camouflage. Eventually, she was able to sit
among them, touching, patting, and even feeding them. It was an amazing
accomplishment for Jane, and a breakthrough in the study of animals in the wild.
Jane named all of the chimpanzees that she studied, stating in her journals that
she felt they each had a unique personality.

One of the first significant observations that Jane made during the study was
that chimpanzees make and use tools, much like humans do, to help them get food.
It was previously thought that humans alone used tools. Also thanks to Jane’s
research, we now know that chimps eat meat as well as plants and fruits. In many
ways, she has helped us to see how chimpanzees and humans are similar. In doing
so, she has made us more sympathetic toward these creatures, while helping us to
better understand ourselves.

The study started by Jane Goodall in 1960 is now the longest field study of any
animal species in their natural habitat. Research continues to this day in Gombe
and is conducted by a team of trained Tanzanians.

Jane’s life has included much more than just her study of the chimps in
Tanzania. She pursued a graduate degree while still conducting her study,
receiving her Ph.D. from Cambridge University in 1965. In 1984, she received the
J. Paul Getty Wildlife Conservation Prize for "helping millions of people
understand the importance of wildlife conservation to life on this planet." She
has been married twice: first to a photographer and then to the director of
National Parks. She has one son.

Dr. Jane Goodall is now the world’s most renowned authority on chimpanzees,
having studied their behavior for nearly 40 years. She has published many
scientific articles, has written two books, and has won numerous awards for her
groundbreaking work. The Jane Goodall Institute for Wildlife Research,
Education, and Conservation was founded in 1977 in California but moved to the
Washington, D.C., area in 1998. Its goal is to take the actions necessary to
improve the environment for all living things.

Dr. Goodall now travels extensively, giving lectures, visiting zoos and chimp
sanctuaries, and talking to young people involved in environmental education.
She is truly a great conservationist and an amazing human being.
